every year Bill and Melinda Gates
released a letter talking about their
philanthropic efforts this year the
letter is all about the future
specifically how technology will
dramatically change the lives of the
poor in just the next 15 years that's
exactly the sort of thing we think about
at the version so we asked Bill Gates if
he would be our guest editor in February
as we explore the four areas he thinks
will undergo the most change as you
might have guessed bill agreed and I
spent the afternoon with him talking
about his vision for the next 15 years
he also talked a little smack about
Bitcoin its kind of especially here
because the foundation is now 15 years
old and also this year we have the UN
looking at the Millennium Development
Goals which were the world's parvis from
1990 to 2015 and adopting the next 15
years ago so what can we get done by
2030 so we pick health education farming
and banking and say we think some very
dramatic things can happen fact we go as
far as to say we bet that life for the
poorest will improve more in this
15-year period than it ever has before
so let's get right into the four areas I
want to start with health because I
think that is where you're making both a
set of big bets on what technology can
do and on what just fixing the
infrastructure can do so what are the
sort of the two areas that you see
happening now
yeah health is where we've spent the
most money the majority of our work has
been there part of that is is the
upstream science inventing new vaccines
and part of its been the downstream once
you have those vaccines how do you get
them out to all the world's children
we're raising the money so that the
limited budgets of those countries don't
block them from getting even the the
very latest vaccine so one for diarrhea
called rotavirus next five years will
get out to all the kids one for
respiratory disease called pneumococcus
I will get out to all the all the kids
and those two alone will save over half
a million lives and that's why we think
we can go from the 1 and 20 kids 5
percent who died before the age of 5 now
15 years from now get that down to be
one in 40 in addition to health gates
thinks farming will get far more
productive for the world's poor
well to get agricultural productivity up
you want many factors working in your
favor you want better seeds you want
farmers to adopt the best seeds the
farmers have got to be a lot more
educated because they could often grow
two crops in the season and the way they
deal with soil health by rotating the
crops can make a big difference they
also need a credit system because if
they don't have the money to get
fertilizer that alone will cut their
productivity very substantially and so
that farmer education system that's
sometimes called the Extension system
the Rd to make those better seeds which
is really very underfunded by managing
those things well we predict that we'll
get African productivity up to 1.5 times
where it is today and that will get
Africa to the point where even with its
population growth somewhat worse whether
instead of importing feet food it will
be able to feed itself so when you talk
about developing better seeds it's that
to me sounds like you're talking about
GMOs without really talking about GMOs
is that a term that you're avoiding
because it's a boogeyman even though
when people figure out what GMOs are
they're generally okay with it it seems
like we're not talking about actually
big AG companies doing GMO research
well GMOs are very well accepted in some
countries like the United States and not
as well accepted in in Europe the
African countries will have a choice of
whether to use those tools and there is
quite a bit of improvement still
available with conventional breeding but
in this time frame the GMO derived seeds
will provide far better productivity
better drought tolerant salinity
tolerance and if the safety is proven
then the African countries will be among
the the biggest beneficiaries and so I
you know by making sure that their
safety review is well funded so it's all
done on a basis the same as we do for
medicines I mean after all medicines
some are very dangerous and yet you know
every country says if something goes for
a safety review they're not going to
deny themselves the benefit of a
breakthrough medicine so I think most of
Africa will see this as
a way to improve their productivity but
it's a it's a sovereign decision no no
one makes that for them right so can you
step in and provide so the like a quasi
regulatory oversight and say you know
we've invested in Monsanto we've
invested in cargo we've looked at this
and our foundation will provide the
vouchsafe for these things or you're
going to leave that up to each of these
nations to do alone and they might not
have the resources to do it but we can
fund training so that they have
scientists who can staff their safety
commission we can make sure that the
studies that they're done and done well
we can incent the companies that are
making these great seeds for rich
countries we can work with them to make
sure that it's at least available
actually at a lower price because that
tiered pricing where poor countries get
a better prices worked so well in
medicines that same type of thing we can
make sure happens with these crops but
at the end of the day you know they get
to decide anything about which vaccines
which drugs which seeds are okay you
know that's that's their country but
their expertise is is developing so I I
feel like they'll you know they'll
they'll make a good choice and I want to
talk about pricing just real quick so I
have a quote here from the UN conference
on trade development 2013 report and I
was gonna read it well fast the
perception that there is a supply-side
problem is questionable hunger and
malnutrition are mainly related to the
lack of purchasing power and/or
inability of rural people to be
self-sufficient and so I guess my
question is is this really about
developing more crops more more supply
or is it really about the income
inequality in this countries whether you
you food doesn't magically move itself
from one place to another you know
otherwise you know the sinks of rich
world homes you know all that nice stuff
that you know it's good stuff clean
doesn't get eaten it would be there and
we do have population increase where
Africa in particular will grow a lot and
then we do have as people eat more meat
they there's an inefficiency that you
have to grow more
to create the equivalent number of
calories in meat so we have to increase
world food productivity quite a bit
almost double it by 2050 between all all
the different factors and one of the few
places where there's acreage that's not
being used and that the productivity is
way below the world average is in Africa
and so it's wonderful that many of the
poorest people in the world are African
farmers getting their productivity up so
they can have more nutritious food more
food and meeting that global demand
those two things are going to go
together and so it's a huge win-win that
as we help them we help feed the world
let me ask it much more directly is it
better to invest sort of in the supply
side or is it better for you it's a very
wealthy manager supply people food well
the impact of a more productive seed
used by millions of farmers it
multiplies that Ardi investment you know
by factors of a thousand that's right
like writing a piece of software that
millions of people get to use you know
would I have been better to go to
somebody's typewriter and type up a Word
document for them or instead of using
Excel I'm I'm actually good at
multiplication I could have done the
multiplication for them or should I
create Excel and then it it can do a lot
of multiplications for a lot of people
so there is something that only
philanthropy and government can come by
and do and it's far more impactful than
doing that as a handout the scale of
government as a whole is gigantic
compared to philanthropy plan 3 has to
pick the risky diverse things that the
mountain either the market or government
were going to do an RD our pilot schemes
to improve delivery those are the kinds
of things that philanthropy is unique at
driving forward Gates his vision for
banking in finances perhaps his most
idealistic he believes mobile payments
and micro transactions will allow the
world's poor more and better access to
financial institutions and credit
systems even if problems like regulation
and technology lock-in aren't fully
solved part of it is that the fixed cost
of ATM machines and bank tellers and
that means that small transactions are
money losing in the old system there's
just too much labor too much paper or
too much physical activity in the new
digital realm where we take and build a
debit card equivalent that's just your
cellphone as we've seen in a few
pioneering countries like Kenya with a
system called M pace our talk about the
Bangladesh B cash that's a newer one but
that's catching on pretty quickly there
even 50-cent type transactions you can
have an under two percent fee and so it
starts to be economic to Bank the very
poorest not with branches or ATMs but
simply with the cell phone and so now
all these benefits of ok I'm a farmer
when I sell my crop help me to set aside
enough for next year seed and fertilizer
or my kids going to school help me do
the set-aside so I won't be surprised
when those fee requests come in that
that is going to be delivered through
that digital infrastructure so digital
infrastructure is something that you are
particularly expert in and so you know
when I look at that I think that's great
and the increased liquidity of
transactions and assets when you move
them to phones instead of cows obviously
makes a lot of sense but the flip side
of it is that you're offering a lot of
power now to technology vendors who may
not be in a market where poor people
have enough market power to move off
their platform or pick a better rate or
do any of your normal things at
consumers and otherwise regular
technology marketplace would do how do
you solve that problem where you're you
want the best technology product to win
or the most fair to consumers to win but
because the vendors could get there
first can lock people in might just
necessarily run away with it no it's a
good point the there's a need for a
utility type service that lets you move
money when you want to pay someone else
pay a store so that you can pay a store
no matter if they use the same bank if
you do you can pay your relative in the
rural areas no matter if you use a
different bank or if you want to switch
your account from bank one to bank two
and so a lot of our work to get this
low-cost digital debit card using the
cell phone going is make
the regulator has set up the right
safeguards and that includes a money
transfer system that has very low fees
that lets and insisting that every bank
that's licensed connect up and have
these reasonable feeds it's kind of like
phone number portability is in the
mobile space that you can switch carrier
or not have to change that phone number
and so that's why the Foundation's role
I'm working with these regulators and
taking lessons from different countries
will help get this into the the most
pro-poor form we can so let me ask you
that because there's another answer to
this question so you're talking about
relying on regulatory infrastructure and
banks participating but there are many
many investors and smart people out
there who will tell you that the answer
to these questions is Bitcoin so what do
you think about Bitcoin is the solution
of these problems well the the effort to
make sure your Bitcoin provider isn't
gonna lose your money and your
understanding of the volatility of
Bitcoin I'd hardly say that's ready for
you know poor people to you know have it
go up and down by a factor of two and
you know oops I was at Mountain Talks
now that's not good now I'm at you know
bit whatever so that basic technology
shows that digital can do these things
very cheaply and the fees that have been
built up over time won't stand up even
for for small transactions now making
sure that the thing is fraud resistant
and money can be refunded there's
somebody call up if you think you
transfer to the wrong account or your
counter balance is not what you expect
and so I'm not thinking that the poor
should get out there on like you know
the cutting edge also governments for
most transactions will want attribution
that is the idea of a system or you
can't see you know is that drug money is
that terrorist money should that be
taxed you're gonna have some tension
between the attributed systems like
credit card debit card systems where you
there's actually a record of who's
engaging and the purely anonymous ones
but the one I see us getting the
critical
along with the government regulatory
support we need is one where it's
attributed where we can see who actually
did this transaction gates also thinks
education will dramatically improve in
developing countries is online learning
tools make it easier for students and
teachers to connect around the world
well the availability of the world's
best teacher who can see where you're
confused set the right pace for you
we're all your engagement with that
material your teacher or your parent or
your friend can connect up and see where
you're stuck and give you some advice
we're not there yet
we've met 15 years ago we were just
sticking cameras in front of people and
putting it online and saying okay isn't
that the solution now people like Khan
Academy and hundreds of others have said
okay the Elektra piece is part of it but
interactive problem sets and having your
coach see what it is and understanding
the nature of what you might be confused
about and explaining to you why you
should gather this knowledge and so the
view is that over the next 15 years that
type of material will be wildly better
than even the best is today and it will
be available through phones and tablets
it won't replace face-to-face you know
the social context the the relationship
of that teacher but it'll it'll be
planning gigantic role in letting you
catch up move ahead and overcome
whatever limitations your class size has
so you might be the most famous
motivated learner of all time and one
thing that you had that when you talk
with this vision that these kids might
not have is you were surrounded by open
systems by which you could tinker in
play so I think about critical skills 15
years in the future and I think
programming is one of those skills and
building and hacking is one of those
skills and if you're doing it on a phone
even one of Microsoft's phones or
Apple's phones are you doing it on
tablet to some extent one of Microsoft's
tablets one of Apple's tablets these
systems are closed say don't you tinker
and get in there how do you see like
where do you see that next generation of
hackers coming from that
or all that they can't have access to
soar the inside well I'm sure that it
doesn't exist as well as it should today
but there should be sand boxes even
inside you know take the extreme case
iOS where you can kind of have arbitrary
code so you know we should be able to
let people play around I'd have to say
that the the priority of getting people
coding and exposing a code that's
something you know I'm the backer of
code org
and I think they're doing a good job you
know a day of coding girls that code
lots of good movement there because
we're not dealing with the basics of
reading and writing in these poor
countries I think you know for the next
15 years most the Energy's gonna go into
the basics so I'm enthused about people
primary and I think we can enable it but
our agendas is really at the the more
basic level so I think this is really
important it's something you bring up
here a letter you talked a lot about the
systemic inequality in education
particularly developed world
particularly for girls you haven't seen
a lot about how you intend to address it
you just acknowledge it's a problem and
if you add the tools women with the
means and motivation to use them will
use them but how do you really attack
the systemic inequality there well if
you look at primary school enrollment
secondary school enrollment fifteen
years ago versus today countries are
making a lot of progress on this the
idea that parents you know should not
keep the girl in the house should let
her go out to primary school that's
broadly accepted now we need to get
there for secondary school you know the
United States now Business School
medical school you know male-female
ratios are actually in some cases
favoring the women it's still the
sciences particularly the very hard
sciences and particularly you should get
up to the PhD level where we still have
this huge gender imbalance it's it's a
very cultural thing each country may
have slightly different tactics of how
they get the parents mindset about the
investment in both boys and girls or you
know equally valuable Eve equally
important here on the verge we'll be
hearing more from Bill Gates throughout
the month effect
because he narrates our series the big
future and we write features about his
areas of change